# JSoC2015 Proposal


Efficient data structures and algorithms for sequence analysis in BioJulia
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Applicant: Kenta Sato (Email: bicycle1885@gmail.com, GitHub: @bicycle1885)
* Mentor: Daniel C. Jones (GitHub: @dcjones)


Summary
-------
Large-scale sequence analysis is a fundamental part of recent bioinformatics.
High-throughput DNA sequencers generate billions of short DNA fragments per day from biological samples. These sequenced fragments must be located in other long reference sequences for downstream analyses.
In order to find the matching locations for these short sequences in a long sequence like the human genome within a reasonable time, efficient data structures and algorithms are indispensable.
In this project, as part of BioJulia (https://github.com/BioJulia), we will develop a full-text search and alignment library based on the FM-index[1].
The result will facilitate many applications of the Julia language for biological sequence analysis, and encourage the uptake of Julia in the bioinformatics community.

What I will make
----------------
I will implement a sequence aligner based on the FM-index to handle genome-scale sequence data from high-throughput sequencing.
The FM-index is the most commonly used technique to build fast and compact indices for full-text search, adopted by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA)[2] and bowtie2[3] when aligning massive numbers (billions) of short sequences to a large genome sequence.
The FM-index search is run over a text generated by applying the Burrows-Wheeler transform (BWT)[3] to the original text. The transformed text needs to be stored in a compact data structure that supports fast occurrence count of characters[5].
To fulfill these requirements, I will develop Julia packages for two succinct data structures: bit vectors and Wavelet trees/matrices.
These data structures enable occurrence counts of characters for a sequence of arbitrary length in constant time.

This project will build on the existing data structures representing biological sequences in the BioJulia core library.
For biological sequences, the alignment algorithm will allow small mismatches or gaps to be robust against noises and genetic variants.
I will examine other implementations to understand how they handle short mismatches well (for example, [FM-index++](https://code.google.com/p/fmindex-plus-plus/) supports a text search within a specific edit distance).

Demonstration
-------------
I have made two new packages required to create the search engine in order to show the implementability of this project:
* [IndexedBitVectors.jl](https://github.com/bicycle1885/IndexedBitVectors.jl)
* [WaveletMatrices.jl](https://github.com/bicycle1885/WaveletMatrices.jl)

IndexedBitVectors.jl implements a data structure like a bit vector, which allows some additional operations like bit count in constant time with small memory overhead.
WaveletMatrices.jl is built on the top of IndexedBitVectors.jl, supporting similar operations on 8bit elements rather boolean elements.

Using these data structures and the FM-index, I implemented a DNA fragment searcher in the human genome.
It can calculate the number of occurrences of the query fragment in a chromosome (about 51 million bases in length) for 10-50μ seconds while a linear searcher requires nearly x5000 time (50-100m seconds) for a short sequence.
Some examples are listed below:

*Search time in μs (best of three trials)*

| Query DNA Fragment | FM-index  | Linear Search |
|:------------------ | ---------:| -------------:|
| 'AAA'              |        13 |       128,992 |
| 'ACGTACGT'         |        27 |       111,608 |
| 'TCTGGAGCCAGAAGC'  |        45 |        82,140 |

For more details, please refer to the following links:
* https://github.com/bicycle1885/WaveletMatrices.jl#demo
* https://github.com/bicycle1885/WaveletMatrices.jl/blob/master/fmindex.jl


Plan
----
* June 15-30 - Choose and implement data structures.
    * There are several variants of succinct data structures. I will survey the literature and prototype candidate data structures.
* July 1-14 - Implement efficient operations and FM-index.
    * Fast, low memory constructions are needed when handling large data. I will implement constructors, FM-index search, and other APIs at this point.
* July 15-31: Specialization for BioJulia.
    * Support search and alignment for biological sequences defined in BioJulia including short mismatches and gaps.
* September 1-15: Debug, documentation, and performance tuning.
    * Brush up details of the program. Produce user documentation. Merge into BioJulia.


Impact
------
This will be a meaningful step toward sequence Julia as an enabler of bioinformatics innovation, because sequence search and alignment are indispensable building blocks of bioinformatics.
Almost all of the existing programs related to this kind of sequence analysis are implemented in C, C++, and Java, with little code reuse between projects. If comparable performance can be achieved, a toolkit for sequence search and alignment in Julia could lower the barrier to tool development considerably.
In addition, the succinct bit vector and the Wavelet matrix are applicable to implement various data structures including numeric sequences and graphs[6].
This means many developers outside the BioJulia project will benefit.


About me
--------
I am a graduate school student at the University of Tokyo, Japan, studying bioinformatics and human genetics.
I have about 1.5 years experience of intensive Julia programming and have developed several packages in Julia:
* [DocOpt.jl](https://github.com/docopt/DocOpt.jl) - a command-line argument parser (registered in METADATA)
* [RandomForests.jl](https://github.com/bicycle1885/RandomForests.jl) - a machine learning method that builds lots of decision trees
* [Snappy.jl](https://github.com/bicycle1885/Snappy.jl) - a binding to a fast compression library
* [ANMS.jl](https://github.com/bicycle1885/ANMS.jl) - a derivative-free multivariate optimization method with adaptive parameters for high dimensional functions

I am one of founders of the [JuliaTokyo user group](http://julia.tokyo/) and we held meetups for three times in 2014 and 2015, the total turnout was about 150. I am also a contributor to the BioJulia project.

One reason to propose this project is related to my research.
At the moment, the most frequently used languages in bioinformatics and genetics would be C++ and R.
However, C++ requires deep knowledge of the language specs to write code and lacks interactivity, even though programs written in C++ are often effective and run very fast.
The R language has a powerful interactive environment, but becomes extremely inefficient when handling large data sets required in genetic analysis; waiting for hours to get results of an analysis in an interactive session is annoying and distractive.
This dilemma in scientific computing results in writing backend computation in C++ and frontend in R, but the situation becomes more complex because developers now have to learn both languages and bindings between them.
I believe that Julia is a promising language to solve the problem in a fundamental way and will be a common tool in bioinformatics in the future.
I aim to speed up this movement with this project.


References
----------
1. Ferragina, Paolo, and Giovanni Manzini. "Opportunistic data structures with applications." Foundations of Computer Science, 2000. Proceedings. 41st Annual Symposium on. IEEE, 2000.
2. Li, Heng, and Richard Durbin. "Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform." Bioinformatics 25.14 (2009): 1754-1760.
3. Langmead, Ben, et al. "Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome." Genome Biol 10.3 (2009): R25.
4. Burrows, Michael, and David J. Wheeler. "A block-sorting lossless data compression algorithm." (1994).
5. Ferragina, Paolo, et al. "Compressed text indexes: From theory to practice."Journal of Experimental Algorithmics (JEA) 13 (2009): 12.
6. Claude, Francisco, and Gonzalo Navarro. "The wavelet matrix." String Processing and Information Retrieval. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
